---
title: I'm bragging about giving to charity, and you should be too!
layout: post
---

Almost a year ago, I started working at 3D Hubs. Since I like domino-effects in
life-changing events I decided that besides finally entering start up life, I
was going to pursue two other goals: getting fit, as one should in the startup
world; and studying computer science more.

Full of confidence, I signed up for a year long gym membership and an at-home
bachelor course for computer science. I got to work and continued studying and
working out for… two weeks, maybe? Then, of course, I quit. The contracts
though, were quite strict: I was stuck to paying for a full year.

A few weeks ago I realised that I will soon be done paying off my self-imposed
fine, and I've been considering what I can do with this money. I could of
course buy more things with it, but that doesn't seem quite like the wise,
adulty thing to do. And then the Mozilla rebranding happened, and suddenly
everyone was talking about Mozilla (and of course Firefox).

However you may feel about Firefox, it should be impossible to deny that
Mozilla is doing good work. As a (somewhat) large player in the browser market
they have a very effective vote in web standards, and they're always pushing
for an open web. And now they're finally putting more effort into improving
Firefox as well! I'm betting that Mozilla has a very good influence on the
internet.

Setting up monthly donations to Mozilla was a two minute task, and it doesn't
take away from my monthly purchasing power. Very quickly after followed
Wikimedia—I was browsing Wikipedia for information on Mozilla. And now I think
I might be getting addicted to charity.

After Mozilla and Wikimedia followed Vluchtelingenwerk, a Dutch charity
supporting refugees. With conservative voices seemingly getting louder and
louder—especially now with Trump in office—helping organisations that support
refugees, minorities, and freedom (as in speech), seems increasingy important.

Giving small amounts of money each month to charitable organisations is a
really easy and incredibly effective way to do some good. So far, I'm donating
about €20 each month. Don't be fooled by small amounts: every little bit always
helps, and you can always raise your gifts later.

To reallocate the money I was throwing away before, I want to continue setting
up periodical donations over the next few weeks. You can keep up with my list
of charities on [my website](http://martijnarts.com).

If that list looks like bragging, it's because I am. People need to be reminded
that charitable giving is normal. I am going to continue bragging, very
publicly, and I encourage you to do the same: spend your money on things you
believe in, and tell the world.
